# Hashing and Hash Maps

## Introduction
- Hash Table is an Abstract Data Structure that represents data in the form of key-value pairs. Underlying data structure is usually an array, series of memory boxes.
- We want to map the hash table keys to array indices. This mapping operation is called Hashing. There are many ways to implement a hash function that performs the hashing operation on keys(strings or anything) to generate integers that can be used as array indices. 
- Properties of hash function: One-way nature; irreversible.

## Need - Use Cases
**Hashing:**

- Password Security: String hashed password and comparing password hash at the time of login.
- Some Data Structures in programming languages use Hashing for there implementation like HashMap in Java, map in Go, etc.
- Compilers use hash tables for keywords used by the prog lang.
- Creating git commit hash by git tool.
- Message Digest: To make sure the files we download from the internet are not tampered, cryptographic hash of the file is calculated and matched with the correct hash.
- Indexing on Database for faster retrieval and many others!

## Tradeoffs

There are some issues with hash tables
- Collision\
The hash function generating same number for different keys, leads to collision
- Sparse array - memory wastage\
when the indices generated by the hash are too far away from one another, the underlying array gets sparsely populated.
- Underlying array filled\
No space remaining to add more key-value pairs

## Structure - Implementation
- Go maps are hash table implementation in go.\
Go's implementation: TODO https://medium.com/kalamsilicon/hash-tables-implementation-in-go-48c165c54553


## Operations - How they work

Constant time access.

- **Add** new key-value pair\
key -> hash function -> indexabale integer -> use this as index and store value there.
- **Get** value of an existing key
- **Delete** a key-value pair

## Where not to use Hash Tables

- For smaller application, it is advisable to use arrays because hash table consumes more memory space.
- Hash tables do not support some operations like iterating over the entries where the keys are within a defined range, finding the entry with the largest/smallest key and so on. In such cases, it is better to go with arrays.

## Problems
- Two Sum
- First Duplicate Number

## Reference
- https://medium.com/kalamsilicon/hash-tables-implementation-in-go-48c165c54553
- https://www.interviewbit.com/courses/programming/topics/hashing/